---
layout: post
title: Basic insight
subtitle: What is the most interesting thing one can do?
tags: [insight, curiosity, reality]
---

It is to study the nature of reality for reality is the weirdest thing that exists. The fact that there are patterns and that we can see and study them is the greatest miracle (but it's no magic). This insight seems obvious but is not easy to truly realize. You might read it and think you understand, but it's entirely different thing to experience it. There are unlimited ways of trying to do it. Examples:
- try to feel your body for about a minute, then try to feel your body and its immediate surroundings, then try to feel the space around you up to close vicinity (like buildings that are nearby), then try to feel the space of whole city (for about a minute), proceed to whole planet, proceed to galaxy, at the end try to feel entire universe! Important remark is that it is not enough to just think about the spaces described. You need to truly try to feel them as if your presence was filling that space. The important thing is how weird it is that it actually happens.
- go outside, look at a tree, try to feel that it really is a living being, how old it is and how it changes over time, touch it and try to just be what you are sensing, empty your mind of all concepts, think how weird it is that it all is happening
- walk around a city, look at how it is and imagine how different it was a hundred years ago, but seriously, don't just think it, feel it, feel how people's life was different, how their ideas were different,
- watch some program about animals and about their mating ways, especially some show about primates, meet with friends and watch the same thing happening, feel how weird it is.

So, reality is weird, but it exists, which is even weirder. We can somehow understand what is going on which is the weirdest. But beware! Understanding what is going on (in terms of how reality works) is Supa hard. If you truly understand then it influences your expectations  of the world and your decisions! Understanding a concept should be propagated throughout your world view and contradictions may arise (which is good)! Ability to understand reality is kind of a byproduct of our minds adapting to growing complexity of our social life. We are biased. We are not well prepared to see reality as it really is. We see it through unconscious glasses of our unconscious motives. To truly get what reality is about you will have to work hard and rewire your brain a little. For starters you will need to understand probability and statistics on some basic level. But lets put that aside. Your very brain is your opponent in the task of getting how the world really looks. Your brain will try to make you work as little as possible and it will use all means necessary. One thing it will do is making good looking world models from however shitty knowledge/observations you have. So when you learn something you probably are wrong and don't get shit. Even if you spend hours on some topic remember that there are people who dedicated their entire life to learning and they know nothing true. Look around you and ask people any question. Then ask them how do they know it and how confident they are (you will be lucky to get sensible answer). If you do it many times or maybe you already have some grip of this (from conversations throughout your life) then you will notice:
- the level of confidence says nothing about truth value of peoples claims
- the perceived plausibility of people's claims correlates poorly with its truth value (this concerns mainly disciplines where you have more noise than signal, like psychology, medicine, diet, etc).

The most important conclusions from this you can draw is this: you cannon be sure of what you know judging by how true it feels to you or how plausible it seems. People make judgment like this all the time and they are mostly wrong. Chances are that you are no different. This should make you think sorta like this: "Shit! How do I really learn anything then?" Then you look around and see people talking through mobile phones, driving cars, taking drugs, using glasses, etc. This makes you think sorta like this: "Phew, maybe we are not doomed.. there are some things that people thought of and they kind of really work". So one good example of understanding something about reality is when it allows us to produce some working mechanism/device/prediction. Beware again! It is neither necessary nor sufficient condition. But let's not go into this path now. My main take away here is that it is possible to understand something at least almost true about the universe and that it's the most awesome thing you can do! It seems to me that concentrating your life around it is one good way spending it. Natural question here is: "But there are countless things one could try to understand. Where do I start?" That is a good question. I'll look at it later.
